---
id: 48
title: BRB-Seq Tools
description: >
    BRB-SeqTools is a user-friendly pipeline tool that includes many well-known software applications designed to help general scientists preprocess and analyze Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) data. It supports the importing and pre-processing of both RNA-Seq and DNA-Seq data, in either FASTQ or BAM file format.
    
website: https://brb.nci.nih.gov/seqtools/
toolTypes:
    - toolType: analysis_tools/genomic_analysis
researchAreas:
    - researchArea: cancer_omics
    - researchArea: cancer_treatment
researchTypes:
    - researchType: basic
    - researchType: clinical_trials
resourceAccess:
    type: open
docs:
    - doc: dctd
pocs: []        
---
BRB-SeqTools is a user-friendly pipeline tool that includes many well-known software applications designed to help general scientists preprocess and analyze Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) data. It supports the importing and pre-processing of both RNA-Seq and DNA-Seq data, in either FASTQ or BAM file format. For RNA-Seq data in FASTQ format, Tophat or Subread/Subjunc can be used to align the reads to a reference genome. In addition, if sufficient computer memory (>= 32GB) is provided, the user can also choose the STAR aligner to map the reads, which, like Suread/Subjunc, significantly improves the computational speed. BWA-MEM and Subread are provided to align DNA-Seq data. Variant calling analysis can be conducted on both aligned RNA-Seq and DNA-Seq data using Samtools or GATK Best-Practices pipeline tools. For human tumor data, the Variant Call Format (VCF) files generated by the variant-calling pipeline can be filtered and annotated using the somatic mutation annotation tools included in BRB-SeqTools. These tools utilize ANNOVAR or SnpEff to provide gene annotation (e.g. Gene ID) as well as functional annotation (e.g. synonymous or non-synonymous mutation)for each variant, along with predicted effects (e.g., deleterious) of non-synonymous single-nucleotide variants calculated by popular prediction algorithms such as SIFT and Polyphen-2. Additionally, for RNA-Seq data, gene-level raw count data files can be generated using HTSeq. The raw count data can be read into BRB-ArrayTools for gene expression analysis. Currently, BRB-SeqTools can run in the Linux environment on local physical/virtual machines or on remote servers such as Amazon Cloud. 
